In order to truly understand the value of data structures we have to go deep down into the way computer
works.
At the fundamental level in order for a computer to run code it needs to keep track of things like variables
like numbers strings array these variables are stored in what we call random access memory or RAM for
short.
That's how programs run.
We remember this from space complexity video right on top that we also have storage where we store things
like our video files music files documents and the storage can be a disk drive a flash drive or a solid
state drive data own storage is permanent or what we call persistent.
So when you turn off your laptop or computer it's still going to be there when you turn it back on in
RAM.
You lose the memory when the computer turns off so why wouldn't we just always use storage.
So we don't lose any data.
Well the problem is that persistent storage is slow because you see a computer is run by its.
You can think of the CPA as the little worker that does all the calculations that we need.
It does the actual work inside our computer.
And this CPSU needs access to the RAM and the storage but it can access the RAM and the information
and the ram a lot faster but let me give you an example as if we're using Google when we run Google
Chrome for example a browser that Google Chrome browser has a piece of code.
Now here I've simplified it and we just have a variable A equals one.
We're just assigning this variable one but we can imagine how.
We have hundreds thousands of lines of code of Google Chrome.
Now in order for our computer to run Google Chrome we run the CPSU for it to do so.
Now when a variable is declared in let's say a script to run Google Chrome it's going to hold that in
memory in our random access memory but once we turn off or close Google Chrome we want to be able to
re open it right.
Well that's what we do when we save an application on our computer.
We save it to storage so that next time we open up google chrome the CPSU is going to grab the program
from the storage so that it can use it again.
And for Google Chrome to run fast and run smaller scripts it's going to keep that information and random
access memory.
We can see this on our computers as well.
If I go to about this Mac my computer we can see here that we have the processor which is my CCU.
We have my memory which is my ram.
And if I go to storage This is my flash storage my persistent storage on my computer so you can think
of RAM in the computer as a massive storage area kind of like a data structure rate well this massive
storage area has shelves that are no we call these address or addresses and it's a really really big
shelf that holds a lot of information and it allows us to run programs on our computer now each of these
shelves holds what we call eight bits or numbers.
You see here one two three four five six seven eight.
Each one of these numbers is a bit and a bit is a tiny electrical switch that can be turned on or off
but instead of calling it on or off we call it 1 or 0 and 8 bits is called a byte each shelf has one
byte of storage and the CPSU is connected to something called a memory controller and in memory controller
does the actual reading of this memory as well as writing this memory because sometimes this shelf might
be blank and doesn't have anything.
Now this direct connection to the CPSU is important because the CPSU asks the RAM Hey what's in shelf
number 0 and the memory controller actually has connections individually to all of these shelves.
Again that's really important because it means that we can access the zero shelf and immediately access
the seven shelf or ten thousand seven hundred and eighty one shelf without having to climb down or step
down.
That's what the name random access memory means.
We can access memory really fast because we have these connections any shelf we want.
We just need to know which shelf we're looking for we can access the bits at any random address in memory
right away even though this memory controller can jump between far apart memory addresses really fast
programs stand to access memory that is nearby.
The closer the information is to the CPSU and the less the has to travel the faster a program can run
so computers are actually tuned to get extra speed boosts when reading memory dresses that are close
to each other for a computer to access 0 and 1 is a lot faster than a computer.
For it to access zero and a thousand because these are a lot closer together and to further optimize
this our computers also have what we call a CPE you cash where the CPSU has a tiny tiny memory where
it stores a copy of stuff that is really really recent and this is called a cash common one that you
might hear is something called a la you cash.
So again if we use Google Chrome as an example we turn on Google Chrome with let's say we have the application
downloaded on our storage the CPE you loads it up and because we've visited hacker News.com it's going
to load up the information for that hacker news and put it into memory or maybe even cash if it can
hold it so why is this important for data structures
data structures.
I remember ways for us to store information.
For example if we want to store a variable a equals one well in our modern computers usually we represent
integers.
That is the number one in thirty two bits.
That is this block size of ram.
And by the way this is now can be 64 bits with more and more recent upgrades but this way we can store
the number one within this blocks of 32 bits.
Why 32 bits.
Because eight bits which is one byte times one two three four so eight times four is thirty two bits
we can store 32 bits of information and this bit of one you can see here 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 and 1 is stored
now in memory.
0 1 2 3.
Or the address.
If we have another variable B equals to 7 we would store it in the next block over here in our RAM and
doing this.
You can now think about how systems that are 8 bit can hold two hundred and fifty five bits of information
things that are sixteen bit.
Well they can hold a lot more information.
And now we have systems that are 32 bits.
We can see here that we can hold a ton of information and then if we had 64 bits that is instead of
having four little shelves over here we have eight shells shelf sometimes eight bits.
Well that's a lot of information that we can store.
And the bigger this is the more diverse that information is.
If we had an eight bit system.
Well the number two hundred and fifty six we can't really store that.
That's really hard to do.
And I can demonstrate this to you with JavaScript you see there's something called integer overflow.
Now javascript technically doesn't have integers.
It only has what we call a 64 bit floats.
But the idea is that a computer can only store a certain number of information so using this syntax
in JavaScript we have math dot Pao which is a function that returns the base to the exponent power.
That is the first parameter is the base to the power of the second parameter.
So we can create really large numbers like math dot dogpile.
So 5 to the power of 100.
If I run this we see the number over here.
If I increase this to let's say 6 again another large number.
Now what if I keep going and change this to six to the power of a thousand we get infinity.
What what is that.
Well as the number becomes too large to store in our RAM then we need to represent this number that
we cannot store into something that is tangible in JavaScript space it is infinity.
We can only store this much information and no matter how big I make this any number above a certain
threshold is going to just say infinity.
How cool is that.
Now let's go back to the slides I showed you all of this because other data types other than numbers
work the same way.
Each data type has a number of bits associated with it and that needs to get stored in the system and
the system allocates that storage and then the CPSU reads from that storage.
Now I'll leave a link for you after this video so that you can get more information if you want.
We don't want to get too deep in this but a data structure is this a data structure is an arrangement
of data you can define the way you interact with this data and how it is arranged in RAM.
So some data structures in RAM are organized right next to each other.
Some are organized apart from each other and they have different pros and cons on access and right Our
goal is to minimize the operation that we need to do for the CPSU to get the information for the you
to write information and that is why data structures are so powerful.
We're thinking about the low level and I don't know about you but this to me when I learned about this
was really really exciting because we have a way now to think how data structures actually affect the
process of our computers and how we can use what we know about computers now to write great code.
I'll see in the next video.